>> Again?
We'll try it again.
Whoa.
You wanna try it on your own?
OK, watch.
What are you looking at?
Hm.
What do you think?
Hey.
Hm, hm, hm.
Wanna do the slide again?
>> You know how many Canadian
fathers think their kid's gonna
be the next NHL player?
Nobody's saying to them
you got no hope in hell
that your kid's gonna
play in the NHL.
Yeah, it's just
kind of funny how
you can have hope for some
things, and yet you know, no.
>> Don't dare have
hope for your child.
>> Yeah.
Its says, this
letter is to confirm
that the patient listed above
has met the diagnostic criteria
based on DSM-5 for autism
spectrum disorder 299.0.
And then yeah, just the symptom
score is high and severe.
I was allowed to go
in the room with her,
but I had to sit in the corner.
And then Steph was on the
other side of a two-way mirror.
She had started with
a couple of toys,
and so then she would say
push, push here, or like this.
But she was saying
some of the testing
was to see if you
could frustrate him.
He would get frustrated, and
then when he's frustrated,
what does he do?
She tried to play peekaboo
with him with the blanket.
>> Peekaboo.
>> And he never made
eye contact with her.
She tried to call his
name at one point,
and then she tried me call him.
>> Oskar.
>> He didn't respond,
even when I said it.
You really gotta
fit into their box.
Their typical box is really
tight and really small.
I knew that, but I was
taken aback by the "severe."
>> When I was 2
and 1/2 years old,
I was completely non-verbal,
completely out of it,
in my own world.
A lot of tantrums and rocking,
and I looked really severe.
>> I was a rocker.
I was a droner.
A droner means that I
was on a single tone
for long periods of time.
>> And you're gonna
go hello, Izzy, hello.
>> We have five children.
Our oldest is Livie, who's 11.
>> Superfly.
>> Ted, who's nine.
>> Anika is almost four.
And the twins have
just turned two.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> We feel that Izzy's
a good six more,
like nine months ahead of Oskar.
With Oskar, he has no
words, no sounds, even,
that are typical baby sounds,
the bah-bah, dah-dah sounds.
>> Izzy, ring, ring.
>> Bah-dee.
>> Ring, ring.
Hello?
>> Hi, hi.
>> Hello?
>> Oh da yo.
>> Often children with
autism have repetitive stims,
where they're flapping their
hands or they're spinning
and jumping.
Well, for Oskar, it is jumping.
>> Hi, Izzy.
>> Izzy will pretend phone.
So again, an age appropriate
milestone is to mimic,
pretend play.
Here Oskar does come
over to the phones,
but he's more interested in the
light reflecting off the phone
cord and how the phone cord
springs sort of back and forth.
>> Good.
>> He has very little
change in his emotion.
With Izzy, you can
see there's always
a range of emotions with her.
>> Yay!
>> And every time I see
somebody else's baby,
his eye contact is
not there at all.
And when he does
look at you, he's
often not looking directly
in the eye like Izzy does.
He's looking at your
forehead or your hair.
Until you see a child
or experience a child
not making eye contact
for a long period of time,
there's something
definitely where you--
there's something wrong.
It's not even just
a really shy child.
He's actually physically
avoiding looking at me.
>> A drink?
A drink?
>> If you have a two-year-old
or a three-year-old that's not
talking, worst thing that
you can do is to do nothing.
I don't care what
the diagnosis is,
you need to start working
with that kid now.
Because all the research and
all the practical experience
shows that that
early intervention
is really important.
>> A drink!
>> A drink, a drink?
>> Yay!
Good job, Oskar.
>> Yay.
>> Juice, yeah!
Do you want a drink?
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> You've got to put the hours
in to him and get him talking.
And about half of the
children that look
really severe at age
two or age three,
you can kind of pull out of it.
Roughly about half of them.
>> Oskar.
>> And the other
half, you don't.
>> A drink?
[BABBLING]
>> Do you want a drink?
A drink ?
A drink?
Oskar, a drink, a drink.
[BABBLING]
I know, I know.
It's so--
>> It's just he's not
consistent enough.
And I don't know, maybe are
we not consistent enough?
That-- just let him have
a total meltdown until you
get exactly what you want?
It's just, I always struggle
when it's food-related.
I don't know.
What's the wait list there?
Because that's not fair.
It's not fair to give my kid
services as fast as possible?
I don't understand.
Sure, sure, sure.
What's your wait time?
OK.
Three years wait.
>> But now he's five to six.
So that's not
early intervention.
I mean, he should be
speaking well by that time,
and it doesn't get
any better later on.
They lose the ability to
speak and lose those skills.
If he doesn't develop
the first words,
then nothing else really
happens after that.
I'm really pushing
to do whatever
we can to get him to
say his first words.
Because I think, then, for
me, then I'll be like OK,
it's started.
But right now with Oskar,
with him not saying anything,
I'm still really like--
I do question Carly
quite a bit, saying like,
is this where Teddy was at?
I came into his life
when he was older,
so he was already speaking.
>> We're looking
at your book, Ted.
So-- that you did.
>> I used to want
to live in Mexico.
When I went to Bayfield,
on the Great Lakes,
I said Mexico is
on the other side.
>> Yeah.
>> That's not true.
>> But it wasn't actually there?
>> No, that's actually Michigan.
>> Ted was-- well, he was
officially diagnosed as being
on the autism
spectrum at 18 months.
When I compare the two of
them, their verbal skills
are probably the same.
And every time he'd say a sound,
then we would get all excited.
So that's why he claps
after he made the sound.
[BABBLING]
You know, at this point he
could maybe say letters,
but he wouldn't be able
to tell you his name.
>> Yeah, this is before my time.
So there's things that I
recognize in Teddy's behavior,
but there's certain things
that I have never seen at all.
>> Teddy.
I-- I--
>> I.
>> Want.
I want.
>> I want juice.
>> Excellent!
Juice?
I want juice.
>> I want juice.
>> Excellent.
>> To have it
happen again, right?
I sit there, and I think, God,
what the hell did I do wrong,
and why didn't I see it at,
like, six months, like right
from the beginning?
Because I can see
Izzy in the hospital,
and she was making eye
contact with me then,
locking eyes with
me, like days old.
And Oskar was always looking
at stuff, or just sleeping.
He slept all the time.
So I was really frustrated at
myself, because I was like,
there it was, black and white.
We just kept saying, oh, well,
she's the girl, he's the boy.
And she's the happy twin,
and he's the sad twin.
Oskar, look.
>> I'd go to the computer, and
it was left at a page where
early signs of autism.
And I'm like, because
I was like, no.
And I said, just calm down.
Because I thought you
were being over-anxious.
And so when it did--
>> Negative and stuff.
You thought I was
being pessimistic.
>> You said, well, I
did this checklist,
and you should do it, and you
should see what you think.
And I was like, sure,
I'll do the checklist.
And then I started going
through, and I was like, shit.
No, he doesn't do that.
Doesn't do that.
And then, yeah, you really
get pissed off, you know?
Because I was-- then I was
like, yeah, I didn't want to--
we didn't wanna do that.
That's not where-- we did not.
We were done with it.
So yeah, it's a
bit disheartening,
when you get through
it all and then,
wow, we're in the
same boat again.
So.
>> 17.5% off everything.
>> Except gift cards.
>> Because we had such
good success with Teddy,
and we've kind of
been through it,
I'm really hoping that we can
get the same kind of results
with Oskar.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Oskar's laughing
at the shadows.
Oskar.
>> With Oskar, he just is
so back there right now that
trying to figure him out is--
I don't know where the
starting point is with him.
>> I really don't like
the spitting thing.
>> Why are we doing that?
>> I really don't
want him to do it,
because it's just
massively hard.
It's just really hard.
>> You know, he does seem
to do it when he stressed,
or when he's really excited.
>> Ew, that was gross.
>> We don't want to do the IBI,
because basically we don't want
to get rid of the behaviors,
because the behaviors are
a clue to what's really wrong.
>> With an IBI session, you
look at the behaviors that you
don't want the
child to be doing,
which is often his stimming.
And then you're trying to
push him to be typical.
This is what I want you
to do, and then you'll
be rewarded when you do it.
It doesn't work if he's stimming
for a particular reason.
And I mean, when we finally
did IBI with Teddy, like--
>> Yeah, they pushed
him really far.
>> He was almost five.
He was like 4 and
3/4, and he was still
eating pureed food, baby food.
>> Put the whole piece in.
Not in the side.
>> Those were like
pears, like canned pears.
He had this hypersensitivity
to textures,
which for him, anything larger
than a crumb was torture.
So I told him to use his
big teeth on the sides,
but he couldn't move the
food around in his mouth.
>> With his tongue.
[HOWLING]
>> Chew some more.
>> It was partly psychological
and partly his sensitivity.
For him, it always felt like
you had put a ton of food
in his mouth.
>> 3, 2, 1.
>> My goal with the
IBI was his feeding.
That was what I still
couldn't seem to do by myself.
When he was not doing
what he was asked,
and this is myself
and the therapist,
because we were
doing it together,
then we were just
supposed to point,
directing him to
sit at the table.
And then we were supposed
to even not look at him.
And he's in a full
on meltdown, and he's
kicking us and yelling and
crying and just inconsolable.
And I mean, this could go on
for an hour, hour and a half.
And we were just supposed
to try to almost corral him
closer to the table, so then you
could say that was a success.
He got to the table.
Well, did he?
Did he go willingly?
No.
And that's when I said,
I'm not doing this anymore.
We haven't
accomplished anything.
>> Like everything that
we do as autistics,
it's all got a reason behind
it, and it's all either reducing
pain or stress, or expressing
something that we don't have
another way to express.
>> That's better.
>> I was just really very
thankful that, in the end,
we did have a couple
really good therapists.
We were just gonna work on
our own and do our own thing.
She wrote him on this
contract, just on a whim, Ted,
what would you really--
she says, what would
you really wanna do?
What's something
that you're wanting
to do that other-- you
know, he says "blow
out birthday candles."
"I, Teddy, will eat three bites
of vanilla cake if Mom makes it
and I can blow out
candles on the cake."
And we held onto that paper.
That was-- you
know, and he knew.
>> Last bite.
>> Remember to chew.
Chew, chew.
>> Ah, seconds, seconds!
>> All right.
You did it.
Good job, Teddy, hurray.
>> There's a huge difference.
We did it in, I think,
a month and a half.
>> Oh, you did it.
Hurray!
Wow.
Excellent.
That was strong blowing.
>> It was done in a caring
way, that he felt then that she
wanted to help him, and that
she didn't wanna hurt him.
I guess the goal
is to really look
at why he's doing this
behavior, so that we
can find something that's along
that line but is way better.
And that's what
I'm learning now.
>> We don't wanna stop his
attempts at expression.
I guess, in a way
he's doing something
there that he's enjoying.
I don't know if it's
a calming thing,
or if it's just
something that for him
is stimulating,
like to his eyes,
if he sees the
shadows or the light.
>> You hear about other people
on the spectrum that had
the same interest in light.
And I mean, even
in the beginning,
right, when he would
look at an object,
he'd always look at it
really close and turn it.
So depending on what they're
really interested in,
and which might again
look like a behavior,
could be what is their interest
and therefore their gift.
>> These are some of
my unfinished programs.
>> How many lines of code?
Did you make it to a thousand?
>> Yes.
>> Oh, wow.
>> Read bed.
I am in bed.
Red, Ned, Ted, and Ed in bed.
Hey, Ted.
Yeah, how's Ned?
>> We just got a letter.
We just got a letter.
Wonder who it's from.
Yeah!
>> Oskar.
>> Good job, Izzy.
>> Yeah!
>> Good job.
>> Yay!
>> We call it super snack.
We figure it's better
than saying bad medicine.
The idea behind it is to get
basically all the supplements
and vitamins, all
the things that are
kind of hard to get into them.
So we put it all together
in one super snack.
Now you gotta watch that certain
things you can't give together.
Again, we're still very
optimistic that we can
work on reversing the effects.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> When Ted was not quite four,
we took him to see a naturopath
that specialized in
kids with autism.
And with that, we
changed his diet.
We added supplements
to his diet,
and we also started
doing B12 shots with him.
>> He improved so much during
that point that it changed his
behaviors and his learning
and his speech and everything.
>> We saw a huge
burst in his words,
and he sort of lost that fog.
>> We have more microbes living
in our guts than there are
people on the planet.
We actually have more microbial
cells that live in our bodies
than we have human cells that
make up parts of our bodies.
And one of the things that
is really fascinating,
that is really just
coming to the fore
is that microbes, especially
the microbes in the gut,
seem to communicate
with the brain.
It may actually be possible
to change those microbes in
and the way that they behave.
And the easiest way of
doing it is through diet.
The microbes may actually
be responding to the foods
that you give them and changing
the way that they actually
metabolize, changing
the way that you think
and the way that you behave.
So there's many, many
reports from parents,
from doctors of children
who are treating autism,
that show that dietary
intervention can actually
be very helpful.
>> And now we're also looking
at trying a grain-free,
legumes-free diet.
Wondering if we should
avoid all sweeteners.
>> Yeah, we've
got to be careful.
>> OK.
>> About how much.
>> But the big focus is going
to be on the B12 injections.
>> OK.
Oh, so there's his blood.
>> A lot of his red
cells, these circles,
have this white in the center.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> And those cells don't
have enough oxygen.
>> Oh.
>> So could be for
a number of reasons.
Could be if he's a little
bit anemic, low in iron.
>> Yeah.
>> Some of the B vitamins
could be an issue, too.
>> Well, and he doesn't like
to eat meat, to be hon-- well,
some he does.
It's hard to get
the meat into him.
And then this, is it weird
that they have points on them?
>> The points, yeah.
Because that's an indication
of digestion issue.
>> OK.
>> Leaky gut.
He doesn't have some
signs of the yeast.
Yeah, I see a fair few those
yeast markers in there,
and the leaky intestines.
That's where probiotics
can help with healing that,
and also with
digesting the food.
>> I'm more really hoping
for a medical solution.
So I'm really hoping that
the diet change and we're
doing the vitamin B12 shots
and all these kind of things
that we're going to see a
real change in his ability
to just interact with
the world around him.
And then, yes, we're still
gonna have to work with him,
but I'm hoping it
won't be as much.
I think he still has a chance
now of catching up to Izzy.
>> The spoon.
>> You know, if he
does start to catch up,
she can really pull him along.
>> Circle.
>> Circle, yeah.
>> Star?
>> It kind of looks
like a star or a sun.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Horse.
Is it the horse?
You wanna move my hand?
>> Horse, horse, horse.
>> Where?
Is it the horse, or
it's on the farm?
>> Horse!
>> My hand, do you
wanna move my hand?
No?
Because the one time he did move
my hand onto the one character.
Which one?
What?
This?
The horses?
Planes.
Let's go.
You all done?
OK, see you later.
And just as it
started, it's over.
He seems to really look
intently at these characters.
But at the horse as well.
So I don't know.
It's just gonna be interesting.
>> I know the kids
make these big leaps,
and then they plateau, and big
leaps, and then they plateau.
I just want a big
leap, and not this
be a whole year of plateauing.
And I do like tick, tick,
tick, tick, tick, tick, tick.
I just feel like
this is our moment
to make those leaps with him.
>> Yeah.
>> Bubbles.
>> We knew we wanted to
start a play-based therapy.
And the first step was to
create a level of trust
with him, so that he would
want to play with us.
>> Look at them all.
>> Look it.
>> When we were working
with Ted in the States,
we were actually even
following a play-based therapy.
>> Ready.
>> Set.
>> Go!
>> There we go.
>> Excellent!
>> I don't know what's funnier,
his reaction or watching
your dad.
>> I know.
>> See, this part of the play
therapy is the good part,
right?
Like you're playing
a game with him,
but you're still trying to get
him to use the words, right?
>> Ready.
>> Set.
Go!
>> Excellent.
Whoa, hold on.
>> So this more of what we
wanna do with Oskar right now.
In the beginning,
we wanted to make
Oskar feel like he
had a safe place
to go when he was anxious,
so he could regulate himself
by coming to us.
>> Squish.
>> Then we could build
in the communication.
>> Squish.
>> Waiting for him to move
his head from side to side,
this is an earlier video.
So at this point,
we're just using that
as his form of communication.
If he moves his head, we
squish him in the pillow again.
>> Squish!
Wee!
>> Now we're to the point
where I can actually give him
the verbal cue of "more."
>> More.
>> And then once he
turns and looks at me,
I will begin again.
>> More!
>> That's the start
of communication,
where I'm asking him something,
and waiting for his response.
>> There's Izzy.
That's Izzy!
[SCREAMING]
>> You're never ready for
having a kid with special needs.
I mean, you always
hope for the best
when you're expecting them.
And then, yes, you
wanna make sure.
There's a lot of things we
need to do with him right now.
But at the same time, there's
four other ones, right?
So I mean, you can't
put one over the other,
but in some WAYS I mean,
you hope you don't have to.
>> How did you react when you
found out there was gonna be
twins?
>> I thought it was awesome.
When it was twins, I
thought it was fantastic.
And I, again, didn't
realize the amount of time.
I just thought well, two?
Two is twice as
good as one, right?
So I just--
You can.
You were doing it the other day.
>> I just probably
can never fix it.
>> Well, go on to another one.
Just try another one.
>> Try a different tutorial?
>> Yeah.
And maybe when I
have some time, I'll
look at it, to give you a hand.
It would be easier if some
were in school, definitely.
>> When I read Temple Grandin
saying "my primary emotion is
and has always been
fear" to me, that's Ted.
He fears so many things, and
he is in a constant state
of anxiety, for sure.
And so for him, that made
school really challenging.
The first school
that Ted went to,
they really valued
Ted as a person.
And they really
tried to alleviate
any stressful
situations that he had.
After we moved, and he had
to start at the new school,
that's when I started
getting phone calls.
I'd ask the teacher
when they're things
that were too stressful
for him, to let
him do his math worksheets.
And he loved doing math,
and he loved to run.
Both of those things
helped him calm down.
But the school here
insisted that he
follow the classroom routine.
He had to conform.
And when they did that and they
forced him to conform, in time,
things just deteriorated.
The way school's set up in the
time blocks really heightened
Ted's anxiety.
Ted is a numbers kid.
He's the only four-year-old
that's watching the clock.
If he didn't pay attention,
and then also you're
like "OK, boys and
girls, time to clean up,"
which is what happens normally,
he would have a meltdown.
It's like somebody that
has a very busy schedule.
You are obsessed with the clock.
And that's when you
see the storyline that
goes through his head,
and he gets overwhelmed,
and there's no end, and
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
and it just spins.
It got to the point where he was
trying to run away from school.
One of the last times was he
was running at recess time.
Ted knew the route to get
home, which wasn't safe.
That's when I decided that
we had to do something else,
that they obviously
didn't want him there,
they didn't know how
to deal with him,
and I didn't trust
them with him.
That's when we said
we're just homeschooling.
>> I still don't have any--
>> I get it.
I got it!
>> Yes.
OK, so that's--
>> We're just sort of getting
into a homeschool group.
They've been, I think, a really
good support in that, for me,
there's been a social aspect.
And then to create a group
for the kids to grow up with.
>> Whoa.
>> The longer we homeschool,
the more we're so happy that
we're homeschooling.
>> Yes.
We just want them to
be doing something
that they're really excited
and passionate about
and being around people
that are in that same bliss.
>> There are days
where the fog lifts.
When I was a child, I would
have one good morning out of 10.
10 days, I would
have a morning where
I would be clear as a bell,
and able to figure out
what was going on around me, and
piecing enough of it together
in order to kind of be able
to cope the rest of the time.
>> A re-re?
Yes.
You're really pushing
me right up to here.
A re-re.
>> Ah, ah, ah.
>> Yes, that'll work.
A re-re.
There you go.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Good job, buddy.
Yay.
Have to put that on
our translator list.
For my kid Carly to put
it on, put a new one on.
A chacha.
I don't know.
We could say a re-re.
You know, a batchi or a
batcha, or a babatcha.
A re-re is not bad for a raisin.
>> Especially if
it's consistent.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> That's huge.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> I don't know.
Do you see a difference in--
because you see him every
few weeks or whatever?
>> Right.
Yeah, no, always saying stuff?
I feel like that's a huge jump.
>> Yeah?
>> That's the one that
he sometimes dances to?
>> Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We can't seem to help
him with his jumping.
Just jumping in place
on a really hard surface
is probably his favorite.
He's trying to ground himself,
so he feels his presence
in the world, basically.
When he goes from
one room to another,
he's always really hesitant.
The floor would be a
slightly different color.
Sometimes, I think it makes
him feel like maybe the floor
levels change.
And so he's very cautious.
There's something
there with the visual.
Like, he's had his eyes checked,
and there's nothing wrong.
I'm wondering if that's why he
still lumbers when he walks.
Like, looking around
the room and looking
at shadows and light.
Or if his depth
perception is wrong.
So we're looking at live
privately paying for--
I prefer occupational
therapists,
because I think
that's what's gonna
help with his sensory issues.
>> People describe varying
kinds of visual distortions.
A checkerboard pattern
on the floor, the edges
will be vibrating.
They'll describe problems
like seeing print jiggle
on the page.
It's been written
on message boards.
I have Picasso vision.
And one of the areas
where they really
need to working on
treatments is how
to deal with some of these
really bad sensory issues.
One kid may have a lot
of visual problems.
Another kid's mainly
sounds sensitive.
Another one may have both.
And then you have the ones
that remain nonverbal,
and they're touching
and smelling everything.
And the reason
why they do it is,
because smelling and touching
still work, and seeing
and hearing is a
jumbled up mess.
I had problems with receptive
speech when I was a child.
If grownups talked very
slowly to me, I understood.
But when they talked fast,
it went into gibberish.
All of the hard consonant
sounds dropped out.
I thought grownups had a foreign
language, a special grownup
talk.
So if I said "the dog
went down the street,"
that might sound like
"the og ent own the eet."
And that's all I'd be hearing.
And I think in children
that remain non-verbal,
they may still be hearing
just this garbled speech.
[CRYING]
>> Ooh.
>> The other way.
>> And stop.
>> Maybe he doesn't have a very
good sense of where his body is
in space.
I know the other OT was
talking about that as well.
>> Yes.
>> In the report I
looked at very briefly.
I don't know how much play
he actually did as an infant.
Did he actually
explore his body?
Did he grab his feet,
and pull them up,
and put them, his
feet, in his mouth?
Did he put his
fingers in his mouth?
So he may not have a
very good body map.
So we were gonna go back there--
>> And start at that.
>> And give him a good body map.
Press his feet, press his toes.
Give him a sense of where
his body is in space.
>> Right.
>> Do the playing.
Play with his body.
Also the key to
his communication
is going to be to enhance his
vestibular system, his movement
system.
Because they're too linked.
>> The vestibular system is our
movement system in the brain,
and it registers where our
head is moving in space.
>> You're in heaven, huh?
>> If we can use
movement and activity,
new pathways are being formed.
And new connections are
being forged or strengthened
within the brain.
>> So that's what I'd like you
to watch in the next couple
weeks.
Can you get him
having more words?
And so that it's more
consistent with all the movement
that you're doing, you
should start to see changes.
I wanna go down.
Tick, tock, says the clock.
Tick, tock.
kaboom!
Oh, he fell down!
He's gonna be one
who's gonna need lots.
And I usually find the kids
who need lots of sensory input
are the ones that I find
have the best therapy
outcome, typically.
Especially if their vestibular
system isn't working,
because I can work on that.
We can just give
and give and give,
and make those systems process.
>> OK, yeah.
Because that was
the thing I've been,
trying to do less, because
she said that she was--
the other OT said that she
thought I was winding him up.
>> I'm not sure what she saw.
I wasn't there to
see clinically.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> As to what she was
seeing in her observations.
>> We were basically told
we were overstimulating him.
So we changed our
routine, and we've--
>> That's what she said,
and I thought, OK, well,
you're the one with the
letters behind your name.
You should know.
And so I just think
about all the time we've
spent, that we've wasted
with someone else.
And so, yeah.
He's growing.
This is the time.
I read somewhere that said you
learn the most at age three,
and then your brain starts
pruning off all those branches
that you don't need, right?
So I mean, grow his
brain as fast as you can,
and make those
neural connections
before it starts dying off.
>> Even though you and I think
that we missed some time,
we should have gone and did
this maybe six months ago
or whatever, we're
still real early on.
So--
>> No.
>> And it doesn't matter.
I know the money is expensive.
I know it's gonna be expensive.
But the thing is,
we'll make money later.
We'll just have to
make money later.
We can't make the time later.
>> We'll find a money tree.
>> I'm just saying, right?
>> Yes.
>> We can't get the time back.
It's gone.
The money we'll
make later, somehow.
>> And up.
And down.
And up.
Down.
Up.
Woo!
Wee, wee!
Woo.
Jump, jump, stomp, stomp, stomp.
Roll.
Slide.
>> We just got a letter.
We just got a letter.
Wonder who it's from.
>> Oskar.
>> Oskar!
Yay.
>> Agh!
I'm jealous, slash,
panicky, slash, not ready.
>> We are the four seasons, and
we fight for the right to rule
the year.
And that was how the
four seasons came to be.
>> So you think
I'm going too high?
>> Yeah, no, just keep coming
down the trunk where you are.
>> Oh!
>> Whoa.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
[CRYING]
>> You wanna jump?
Jump, jump, jump.
Lev, can you put
his song on, please?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think you're good with
the Christmas mood there.
Tomato.
Can we say something?
Tomato, tomato.
Tomato.
We try, and we do
things every day.
I do have issues with
I'm not patient enough,
and I get frustrated when
we're working on things,
and I just don't see the--
I just don't see the progress
every day, that I want to see,
I guess.
That's the main thing.
I know we have
seen some progress,
but it's just not
fast enough for me.
And I think that's
the hardest part.
You know, it's the difference
between having a child that's
gonna be possibly
institutionalized
or actually having
a life, you know?
>> No?
That's not doing it.
See, then when he
spits, then I'm
thinking is he doing that
because I'm not doing enough?
Watch out, Iz.
You like it better when
you-- you girls just
keep crowding me.
OK.
You never hold your arms--
Anika.
Oskar?
Drink?
[CRYING]
Cheek.
Does that feel nice?
It's all gonna go.
Hm?
More water.
[SQUEAKING]
Hm, hm!
A ja-ja, a ja-ja, a ja-ja.
Oskar, a ja-ja?
[BABBLING]
Sure, let's go with it.
That was hard.
Good job, sweetie.
It's really hard
to push, you know?
But we've talked
already with the older
two that unfortunately this
is how it is right now.
You try to give
Livie a little extra,
because she's gone
through this twice.
Right, Liv?
>> Right.
>> Do you want me to
start making lunch?
>> Hm?
>> Do you want me to
start making lunch?
>> Yeah, I'm just having
to wash the frying pan,
because your brother
was standing in it.
Yeah.
>> Hm, just gotta chew
it a little bit more.
No, don't do that.
Oskar.
>> I feel like I'm waiting.
But at the same time, I feel
like time is passing, too.
>> Here, a small piece.
You like the yolk, right?
>> I was better
with Teddy, I think.
But he was farther along.
He was already speaking.
And I'm really
struggling, in some ways,
to figure out what I can
do better with Oskar.
>> No, don't throw
it on the floor.
We'll give it Izzy.
Here you go.
[CRYING]
>> He's still saying
sort of the same sounds.
>> Some days, it doesn't
sound even like he's--
it sounds like he's
regressing a little bit.
[CRYING]
>> Yeah, there's nothing that
seems to keep going with him.
[PHONE RINGING]
>> Hi, hear.
Hi, hear.
>> I don't see him
regressing totally.
It's just in some things.
Maybe we're not pushing
him hard enough on it.
>> We just feel like he's--
>> He's kind of stuck.
>> Something's holding him back.
>> I don't know what you want.
>> We don't know
where we're going.
We don't know if we have
even the right road map.
So.
>> Cheese.
>> What's your name?
>> My name's Teddy!
>> Great job!
What time is it?
>> I hate, in a way,
going back there.
If it was just me
and you were just
doing a documentary
on Ted, and I
had to go back and review
these, it would probably
be very interesting.
But now I'm looking at it with
this whole other of, you know--
>> Is this what we're
gonna have to go through?
>> Like a handbook.
Yeah.
Like, OK, yeah, what
did I do with him?
And how did he
get to that point?
And was that something that
was a skill of Ted's that
is not a skill with Oskar?
So how do we--
>> Bridge that gap.
>> Yeah.
And Ted had some--
>> He had some good skills.
>> I think I got it.
>> Yeah?
>> Yup.
>> What is it?
>> Here, Venus, Mars.
>> Whoa.
Oh, wow, sweetie.
That's really good focusing.
>> Thank you.
>> I think with Oskar, we're
just on a really different
path.
So this doesn't really
relate exactly to him,
because I think his
issues are so different.
So it's just in some
ways, maybe Oskar
is gonna have more trouble
getting the words, right?
>> It's actually Venus.
It's Venus.
>> See if the other one's
in that red-- in that red--
[CRYING]
Where you going?
All right, I don't think I have
the patience for this today.
>> Yeah.
>> I'll be honest with you.
[CRYING]
It's always a
lose-lose with him.
[INAUDIBLE] No more.
And she walks to
the road every time.
Here the gloves are.
Can you put your bum down there?
Hey, grab her,
quick, quick, quick.
Anika, come here.
[CRYING]
Now, Izzy!
>> You want me to
try to carry her?
>> Sure.
>> I think we came into
this thinking we were ahead
of the game and we
knew some stuff.
And I think we've had
to rethink everything.
>> Yeah, we just kept
hoping that, you know.
[CRYING]
Drink?
As Oskar's gotten older,
trying to do what we were doing
in the beginning has created
more anxiety even frustration
with him.
[BABBLING]
What you got?
Lid on.
Turn, turn, turn.
Drink cup ready.
Oh, good job.
>> I think we're not
pushing as hard as we were.
>> Oskar drinking.
>> Yeah, we're not pushing
him as much to get his drink.
Now what we do is, we kind
of put the lid on and go
"drink cup ready,"
and hoping that that
would be something that he
might imitate, you know?
Or some of that, or
some of the words.
Because we never
did that with Izzy
when she didn't have-- when
she couldn't ask for a drink.
We never made her wait
for it or expected
her to say the word "drink"
or anything like that.
And he can't do it.
You know, he's having
processing issues or--
that interfere with it.
Drink cup ready.
Hey.
So that's only gonna add to
his frustration, I think.
Anyways, this is just
something where we've
changed gears a little bit.
Because we never really realized
how much he's dealing with
and how much it's, you
know, affecting everything,
and that it's tough already,
and that these extra demands
that we're putting
on him are not
making it any easier for him.
>> And then we also
will do it intensively,
right under the
author of the program.
We do service Toronto,
Peel, Burlington.
>> I take a plate.
I'd spin it.
I'd watch it.
I'd flap my hands.
Then I'd take the plate
again, spin it, flap my hands.
I would do this over and
over and over and over again.
And my parents were told take
the plate away, you stop him,
you redirect this behavior.
But my mom, thankfully,
did not listen.
Every time she saw me doing
that, she'd get a plate,
she'd sit down next to me,
she would spin her own plate.
She'd get really into it.
And she was told, oh, my,
this is like the worst
thing you could possibly do.
Like, doing nothing is
better than doing this.
This is like the
worst possible idea.
What actually happened is
that when she joined me,
that was the first time
I ever looked at her,
the first time I
ever smiled at her.
The First.
Time I ever did that was
when she was joining.
Here's why we're joining.
We're not joining to
prove we can copy.
What we're joining
to do is we're
joining to show interest in
what your child's interested in.
We do this with our
neurotypical kids all the time.
We just don't do it with
our kids on the spectrum,
and those are the kids
that really need it.
You will never be able to look
at what your son or daughter is
doing with the same
set of eyes again.
You'll sort of be
able to really see
the beauty and the magic in it.
This may be new to autism, but
it ain't new to human beings,
that the children
show us the way in,
and then we show
them the way out.
You are gonna be your
child's best friend.
They will climb
mountains for you.
They will cross rivers for you.
But they have to trust you.
They have to know you're
really their friend.
>> Bah.
>> He.
>> Betcha bah.
[BABBLING]
>> Temple Grandin actually
said your first step is just
connecting with that child.
You're connecting.
You're finding.
She says, Temple says, you need
to find your child's interests,
whatever that is.
>> I don't think Oskar's really
thinking about talking so much.
I think he's thinking
of himself, of himself
in the magical world.
>> Oh, OK.
[INAUDIBLE]
>>
>> So do you think about
yourself like that?
>> Sometimes I do.
And I wonder what job
Oskar is gonna have.
Maybe he's gonna be
an artist like Livie.
Maybe he'll be a coder like me.
I wanna be a coder,
an astronaut.
Maybe an astronaut.
I don't know.
I don't know about the
astronaut, but maybe
an astronaut.
>> So would you have--
could Oskar live with you,
if he wanted to live
with you one day?
>> Yeah, he could.
He could.
>> Yeah?
>> Do you remember, though,
when you were younger, Ted?
Do you remember
like when you could
read but you couldn't talk?
Do you remember that time?
Or you don't remember
that anymore?
>> No, not really anymore.
>> Mm-hm?
>> I don't remember
having autism at all.
>> Say that again?
>> I don't remember
having autism at all.
>> Well, we never thought
of it as anything.
You were just Teddy.
>> I think from the beginning
what we've been trying
to figure out for ourselves
is to what extent autism is
a condition, and where does
your child start, basically.
So.
>> Quack.
>> Quack?
>> Mm-mm!
>> Quack.
>> We realize more that
we have to treat him as--
not that we didn't
treat him as a person,
but you don't always think
that he's making decisions
or he's thinking.
>> Who's that?
[BABBLING]
Is that you?
>> You're thinking that
he's not really there.
But it's more of an issue,
I think, that he's there.
He just can't communicate.
>> Hah?
>> What?
>> As kids, we play with
the sensory distortions,
and it's just part
of what we do.
We-- You've got the beat
'em or join 'em thing.
And most of us kind of
go, well, that was weird.
You know?
[BABBLING]
>> Seven, and an eight,
and a nine, and a 10.
Seven, and eight,
and nine, and 10.
And stop.
>> So the eyes go up
and down this time?
OK.
>> Good job.
That was a good registration.
>> Yay.
>> There you go.
Hello.
>> I don't know of any research
studies that particularly say
that this actually works.
>> Hi, Mom.
>> It's closest to parents.
>> Yay!
>> Yay.
>> All I can say to them
is, here's our goals.
Let's try.
These are our functional
outcomes that we're hoping for.
We'll touch base, you know,
halfway through the treatment,
see if we're meeting them.
If we're not meeting them, we're
gonna change the program plan.
>> Headphones on.
Headphones on.
Yeah.
Looks like Jane Fonda
with them on, but.
[SCREAMING]
>> Wee!
[BABBLING]
>> I think, overall, he's saying
more variety again of sounds.
It's like inconsistent.
You can't get him to
stick on one thing.
>> But that's how communication
starts right, right?
Through those babbling
noises and sounds.
>> Yep.
[BABBLING]
>> Oh, are you gonna
go down the slide?
[BABBLING]
>> One, two, three.
>> Two.
>> Go!
Go down again.
>> I think you feel pressure.
You're making decisions,
but you're also
making decisions that
are gonna, you know,
you have to live with for
the rest of your life,
based on a limited
amount of information
that you have on that subject.
It's just with autism,
if you don't act on it,
they can't just
float through life.
>> Anika's turn.
Wee!
>> Carly, you've talked about
feeling a sense of guilt that
maybe if you had done
something different--
>> I mean, I still
can't turn that off.
I don't know if you ever can.
And it's not right.
It's unproductive and
wastes energy, but--
>> I mean, I think we
all experience guilt,
but I think you take on
too much for yourself.
And then you feel like you
have to solve this problem.
You have to figure it out.
>> No--
>> Because it's so deep,
I'll never get there.
People who are doing
it for a living
never get to the bottom of it.
So I just sometimes
feel that I think
we're jumping into too many
different things, that we're
doing these three
things or four things,
and let's just keep going
with them and see how they go,
instead of looking at something
else to bring in again,
and looking at something else.
Because we only have a
certain amount of time, too.
So.
>> But how do I not know that a
combination of those things are
gonna work together?
Mm-hm.
No, no, I agree.
>> Every time I hear
there's something new,
I feel that same pressure, where
I sit there and I'm like, oh,
why am I not doing that therapy?
Maybe I should look into that.
>> One, two, three, four, five!
>> I feel like I have
to balance the scale,
my internal mother scale, of
feeling guilt vs being there
for your child.
>> Nice roll, nice roll.
Hey, let's go get them.
[BABBLING]
>> It's for that
therapeutic listening,
where the music jumps around
from side to side and goes from
high to low and all that.
So apparently you can
watch him, and if you
see his eyes go to
shift to one side
and then shift to
the other side,
it's like he's registering
on difference in the sound.
[BABBLING]
Shapes?
Heart, star.
Heart, star, diamond, crescent.
Whoa.
What do we see?
>> Heart.
>> Heart, star,
diamond, crescent.
[GUTTURAL BABBLING]
He makes those guttural
noises, because he feels
the vibrations in his chest.
So there's more of a
sense of in his body
where the sound is coming from.
[GUTTURAL BABBLING]
We see things that
he does, and then we
see slides that he's
not doing anything.
And then see some things
that he's done again,
and anyways, it's still
tolerable, I guess.
[GUTTURAL BABBLING]
>> Want some celery?
>> Health is still a
huge priority for us.
>> Celery?
>> The gut brain, we really feel
that's one of the big things
for him.
>> But you can't heal the gut,
unless you're doing it with
the right foods.
>> And he's turned into
this crazy picky eater.
>> Yum, yum, yum, yum.
Veggies!
[GROANING]
>> How are we gonna do this?
See?
The carrot is
wrapped with bacon.
It's like, oh!
He chewed it off, the outside.
And now he's gone.
Oh, well.
We'll keep it for him.
Look at them all.
>> Be careful.
You got socks on.
>> OK.
>> Woo.
>> Happy birthday
to Izzy and Oskar.
>> Yes, yay.
>> Good job.
>> Let's go eat.
>> Whoa, whoa.
>> It's the same.
>> Did he bite you?
>> But he wouldn't do it again.
He bit-- he just went--
you want the letters on again?
>> It's not normal.
Like the different colors and
the balloons on the floor?
Maybe it's all
overwhelming, right?
>> It's the entire spectrum.
When you look at
most of us, you're
looking at people who
are pretty traumatized.
And it's a constant,
ongoing effort
to back down stress
levels enough
in order to be able
to continue to engage.
Nature does ripples on
water and flickering leaves.
And those little,
gentle movements
are really calming on
our nervous system.
Soft, gentle,
wiggly motions that
allow us to come into
a more relaxed state.
Because we're so used
to being so overstressed
by our environment, and told
that we can't do the things
that calm us down,
because they're not
acceptable in public.
>> We haven't seen
this spinning.
>> This is a new thing, with
the spinning of the pen.
Whatever.
He's moving through
a different stage.
>> We all do things
to self soothe.
And if that's what
it is, then you still
need to let him do something
that's gonna self soothe.
[BABBLING]
Why should we force somebody so
far out of their comfort zone
that they're not them anymore?
Oskar, when he's
just happy spinning
or when he was spit painting,
or when he looks at the trees
and sees the light
through the trees,
I mean, he's in a
state of possible bliss
that you and I can't get to.
So is that negative,
or is that positive?
>> Mm-hm.
>> And I thought, yeah,
sometimes it's very positive.
Maybe they're these
fantastic artists
that can never describe to
you verbally what they see,
but their talent allows them to
create images that, you know,
no one else can create on
that level that they do,
or produce music so
perfectly pitched,
or go through lines of
code with such detail.
>> Yeah.
>> And to find the one flaw.
>> MouseX is less an Img,
and MouseY is less than 125.
Play sound.
It's too easy.
I want it to be harder.
>> Like usually they
display the top rated games.
So his was in the top 20.
So it showed up on
the board, you know?
The display board.
And then it's just been
moving up slowly in the ranks.
Where are you?
Oh, there you are.
Number five!
>> I moved back one.
>> Very good.
>> OK.
Let's see.
>> To have a child that
maybe doesn't talk,
it's your natural instinct
to want to change that,
to fix that, to not accept it.
And I was seeing that
to Steph, if we're not
accepting to the diversity
that is human beings,
then we're not gonna
get any further.
>> Hi.
Hi, Oskar.
Hi, Dad.
>> Hi.
Hi, Oskar.
Hi, Dad.
>> I don't see that as part of
Oskar, that he doesn't speak.
I see that as a
part of the autism.
Which, again, I'm not
sure if it's permanent,
or if it's just delayed
on speech or whatever.
And in order for me to be
able to-- maybe it's a selfish
thing--
me to be able to
relate to him better,
I would want him to talk.
>> So you like that on
your feet, my beard?
[GUTTURAL BABBLING]
>> I see.
I see.
>> A clue.
>> I see.
I see a clue.
>> Yeah, good job, Oskar!
[BABBLING]
>> Many, many of us
struggle to find words,
because we don't
have enough supplies.
But you're wanting to
connect and relate.
Canned words from movie
scripts, or commercials,
or from songs, words that
you already have memorized,
you can pull those words
up much, much more easily
than you can find your own.
>> I see a clue.
>> Yeah!
>> A clue.
>> Blue's clues.
>> Yellow!
A
>> Coal.
Yellow!
>> I see a coal.
>> A coal.
A coal.
>> It's a flower.
>> A coal, a coal, a coal.
>> Yeah.
>> A coal.
>> Imagine the inside of
your body is like a city
that's undergoing a huge
amount of construction.
You have to do loops
and loops and loops,
in order to get to
where you need to go.
>> A clue, a clue!
A clue, a clue!
>> And doing those loops,
your stress level goes up.
You use a lot more fuel.
By the time you
actually get there,
you've used a lot
more time and effort.
So the cognition is happening,
but getting things in and out
is really difficult.
>> You totally miss it.
>> Yeah, when we
heard "I see a clue"
and realized that they were
three words to go together,
we almost didn't think he had
the capability of stringing
several words together.
>> Good job, Oskar.
>> And then in some ways, beside
Teddy there, in some ways,
you can see a family
resemblance, too.
So.
Well, this isn't sustainable
, what we're doing right now.
>> No.
>> I'm right in the middle
of trying to get a job, or--
at least with some money
coming in, some of the stress
should go away, I hope.
Some of the stress of how
are we gonna cover this?
How are we gonna cover that?
Which is what we've been dealing
with for the last little bit
as well.
And hopefully we
can replenish some
of the money we've been spending
and pay off some of the debt
that we're in.
So it's just, yeah.
Carly will have to carry
the load of everybody
here, basically.
And I am actually a little,
you know, worried about
how it's gonna be, not being
around you guys all the time.
So.
>> Mm.
>> So we'll see.
>> We'll have a
picture of you up.
>> Yes.
No, but for me--
>> Paper cut out.
>> --I'll have to have
pictures of you guys, or video.
And then I might
have to turn it off.
Because it gets annoying.
>> And one of those folding
out frames that folds, folds,
and folds, right?
>> Right, yeah, yeah.
So but we'll see.
>> There's the saxophone.
You gonna play?
>> It's teaching us to have
to constantly problem solve.
And it's maybe gonna help him
in turn to constantly problem
solve.
>> What did you want?
Did you want the farm?
You see the farm?
Yeah?
No?
>> He's actually asking me
for the markers that he sees
sticking out of the
corner of the basket.
>> Barn.
>> If he has the--
>> And I think that
it's this barn.
>> What do you want?
Can we point?
>> And you can almost hear him.
He gutturals, and
then he almost says--
[GUTTURAL BABBLING]
>> Marker.
Barn?
Barn.
>> Though here he's even
more frustrated with me,
because it's wrong.
[CRYING]
>> No, no, no, no.
>> We do have a difference
of opinion, I think, on that.
>> We still do, I think.
>> On that acceptance, though.
>> Mm-hm.
>> But when I think
of acceptance,
especially when it
comes to Oskar's autism,
I don't want to just say,
well, that's who he is,
and we just accept it.
Because I think it's also--
I'm worried that it's
too close to just saying
that's where he is, and
there's nothing we can do.
And you know, we have to
accept him like he is,
and we don't try to change him.
Where if somebody was
hurt, or injured, or sick,
you wouldn't just say, well, I
just accept that they're sick,
and you know, it's too
bad that they have cancer,
and we just accept-- no,
I accept Oskar, who he is.
But I don't accept--
well, right now, and even,
I think, for my own sanity,
I'm not accepting
that he won't talk.
That's not in my--
I'm not there yet, and
I don't wanna be there.
Red.
Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
[BABBLING]
>> And this other book
that I've started,
the gentleman that
wrote the book is gay.
His parents at one
time in his life
would have probably
done anything
to have "fixed"
him, to have changed
it, to have made him normal.
Right?
And he hated them for that
time, because at that point,
they weren't accepting him
of who he was as a whole.
>> And that's what
bothers me in a way.
Because that's not
what I'm feeling.
But I'm just saying that some
of the effects of having autism
are really terrible.
Like a lack of being
able to communicate,
that kind of thing, right?
I'm just saying, right now
Oskar's frustrated, I think,
because he can't
get his ideas out.
I think he's frustrated by that.
>> I know.
>> The way Izzy's not.
He's frustrated, because
he can't communicate.
I'm frustrated because
And I'm just thinking,
if that's a cau--
if that's because of autism,
then I hate autism for it.
>> I don't wanna focus
on that one thing.
It's like, I'm so happy that
we can have those moments,
where I know he's really
connecting with me,
even though he's
not talking to me,
not saying "Mommy",
even though he's not saying "I
love you, Mommy," or whatever,
he looks now in my eyes, and I
know he's recognizing my face.
He's seeing me.
He's happy, and we're
sharing a moment.
And that's part of parenting.
That's what you're
looking for as well.
You're looking for that bond.
That's what, I think, in
general, humans are doing.
That's why we interact.
But I think we
get so stigmatized
that that interaction
with people
has to be verbal communication.
>> Whoa.
Whoa.
Tickle, tickle, tickle, tickle.
Tickle, tickle, tickle.
>> Our seven, our
group of seven,
is what is safe and what will
be with him, the kids, for sure,
for the majority of his life.
[BABBLING]
Though I thought he was
gonna have more words,
and he'd be communicating
with us verbally,
by the end of the year,
that's so far down
in the line of what's
really important.
And that trust and respect
and caring, safe environment,
of connecting, that
intimacy with the people
that really care about you
is, I think, what we just
spent the last year doing.
>> Yay!
>> Woo!
what about the other boot?
Can you get that one off?